## Proposal for Scuttlebutt Resources for the non-technically minded. 

*[Part of our SSB Revamp Vision](README.md)*

# Goal

This project will develop a set of resources that articulate the spirit of Scuttlebutt and all its
awesome potential, but targeted to people who are not developers or technological hobbyists.  With
these resources, our network is accessible to a larger group-- who can get onboarded and active
without needing to understand github, node dependencies, or the malleable and nuanced definition of
a pub.

These resources would proudly display our existing, beautiful solarpunk weirdness, so people are
drawn to the culture of this community as much as to the promise of its tech. 

# How it Will Work

We create a set of videos, articles, and other illustrative materials that succintly articulate what
scuttlebutt is, why it's unique, and why someone would want to join.  We would also create an
equally rich set of materials that help people once they've joined, to help them make sense of the
space and quickly feel at home.  These resources would all live on scuttlebutt.nz, in a revamped
homepage.  In this way, there's a simple link a SSB-er can give to friends interested in this
'verse, but offer an entrance that isn't overwhelming with tech docs.

While the resources would work together to give a nuanced, helpful introduction to our 'verse; they
would also be designed to work on their own and without any context.  In this way, each piece could
be shared through the old internet's existing channels as interesting standalone pieces, but they
would  lead people to scuttlebutt.nz and all the other riches to be found there.

# Who These Resources are Meant for 

There's millions of people with computers who quality as "non-technically minded".  I do not think
we should try to make materials that would speak to any of these millions.  Instead, we should focus
on the types of non-technical people we'd love to have in our community now, and focus our language
to them.  This aims for a slower, more organic growth that builds upon our awesome, emerging
culture.  

I've written up a list of personas that I think fit the type of people we should direct our efforts
to.  It can be found here: [Personas](personas.md)

If you think there is someone missing from that list, please feel free to make a pull request!

# Index of these Resources

*Click the link to travel to this resource's page within the REPO.  Each one is is various states of
"done-ness"*

### [Introduction to Scuttlebutt in Less than 3 Minutes](ssb-intro-video.md)

A 30 second to 1 minute video that enthuses upon the core values, concepts, and awesome things of
Scuttlebutt.  It's intent is to invite folks to learn more within the site (or by travelling to the
site, if they see the video on some other network).  For that reason, it is less concerned with
exactness than with spirit, and is the most 'markety' of our resources.

### [Revised Landing Page for Scuttlebutt.nz](scuttlebuttnz-revamp/README.md)

A simpler homepage for scuttlebutt that succintly explains the spirit of our community, and offers
an entrance to both dev and non dev resources.  The page is designed for better navigation and
keener cultural aesthetics.

### [Simple Animation Explaining what to Expect when you first join
Patchwork](onboarding-animation.md)

A quick and simple addition to our homepage that shows, in handy GIF form, what is going to happen
once Patchwork is done installing and you join SSB.e


### [Understanding SSB in Context, by Understanding, Conceptually,  how Centralized Systems
Work](ssb-in-context/README.md) 

A series of articles/resources that explain how simple functions like sending messages or posting
statuses happen within centralized models.  These articles detail the overlooked technical
processes, and business diescions, required in a centralized system.  Through this context, a user
can better understand what makes SSB different and why it's important.

Individual Resources: 

[Understanding Centralized Models: How to Send a Message to your Grandma On Facebook: A Step by Step
Guide](ssb-in-context/facebook-tutorial.md)

[Understanding Centralized Models: How to Post an Effective
Tweet](ssb-in-context/twitter-tutorial.md)

### [How to Throw an SSB Party](how-to-throw-an-ssb-party.md)

A friendly guide for the current Scuttlebutt member who wants to invite their friends onto the
'verse.  It details the best ways to onboard folks when in the same room and on the same network. it
also details the best ways to throw a super good party.

### [Markdown Style Guide](markdown-style-guide.md)

An easy-to-miss stumbling block for our clients is not knowing how to properly write messages in
them.  Markdown is common in tech, but not as common outside of it.  Producing an ssb- specific
markdown style guide, that can be incorporated into our clients, would help people confidently post.

### [SSB Compared to other Clients/Networks](ssb-comparisons.md)

SSB is it's own beautiful thing, which means it's kinda like (but not quite like) a bunch of other
things.  This  small guide compares SSB and its current clients to other well-known
messaging/socializing platforms.  This way someone can have the right context for what to expect(and
get excited about) in SSB.

### [What is Solarpunk?](what-is-solarpunk.md)

This identification has gained an incredible life within the scuttleverse, and it is a relatively
new genre/marker within the larger world.  This article outlines how we define solarpunk and how
it's expressed within the network (from Spider-Farm to Dominic coding ssb on a solar-powered
computer to our practical discussions of airship manufacturing and governance without oppression)

### [Tips for Getting Started](tips-for-getting-started.md)

This would be a video/article about how to post, and what to post. How to
subscribe to a channel, and what a channel means. The difference between public and private posts,
Some popular topics to check out, and other encouragement to help new folks express their unique
selves within our unique 'verse.


